Debugging 

What we will discuss today

-Q's about the last week's homework
- What is debugging?
- Why learn to debug?
- General debugging procedure
- Types of debugging 
     -Breakpoints
     -Steping Into, Over, Out
     -Data Inspection

- Coding tasks


Questions about the last weeks's homework?

-Write a script automatically push to your Github repo every new file appearing in your local directory (related to the course)


Debugging
- identifying and removing errors from hardware or software.
- finding the root cause workarounds and possible fixes for bugs
- Examples: interactive debugging, control flow analysis, log file analysis, monitoring at the application 
or system level, memory dumps, and profiling


Why learn to debug?
1. Find a root cause: Cuze your production code is failing.
2. Simple debugging is using print statements. But  how far it can take you? Especially if your system setup is complex:
backend+database+API+fronted+many other components.
3. You will train your intutition following well-defined patterns: Majority of bugs can be quickly 
inspected and fixed using modern tools. Knowing which tools to use and how use saves lots of time in future.


Assumption: You've installed Intelli J for your other class
If you want, you can follow this installation  guide:

https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/installation-guide.html


General debugging procedure
1. Define where the program needs to be stopped.
This is done using breakpoints.
1.1 The alternative to using breakpoints is manually suspending the program at an arbitary moment.
2. Run your program in debug mode.
2.1 Just like with regular running of the program, you can run multiple debugging sessions at the same time.
3. After the program has been suspended, use the debugger to get the information about the state of the program and how it changes.
3.1 information about website variable values, the current state of the threads, breakdown of objects that are 
currently in the heap, and so on.
4. Stepping feature gives you the control over step-by-step execution of the program.
5. When you have determined what needs to be fixed, you can do it without terminating the session. 


Debugging type-Breakpoints (checking code during runtime)
1. Pause a program using a breakpoint in Intellij Just
a. Special markers that suspend program execution at a specific point. This lets you examine the program state behavior. 

void print() {
    System.out.println("Printing to console");
}

Debugging type-Stepping Into, Over, Out
1. Works together with breakpoints
2. Controls how you run through a paused program, i.e step or walk
3. Step into: run the current line and move to the next line in the sane function or calling function
4. Step over: move into to the next function or method call in the present line
5. Step out: run the rest of the current function and pause at the return point to the calling function. 


Let's debug a code 

Let's debug a code
public class AverageFinder {
public static void main(String[] args) {
System.out.println("Average finder v0.1");
double avg = findAverage(args);
System.out.println("The average is " + avg);
}
private static double findAverage(String[] input) {
double result = 0;
for (String s : input) {
result += Integer.parseInt(s);
}
return result;
}
}


Coding tasks till next week ('*' recommended but optional)
- Add breakpoints into your Java code (from the other course) and step in/out
of your functions and inspect changing variable values in Intellij or similar IDE. 


